===PAGE 1===
Mixed-integer linear programming based optimization strategies for
renewable energy communities
Armin Cosica, Michael Stadlera,c, Muhammad Mansoora,b,*, Michael Zellingera
aBEST - Bioenergy and Sustainable Technologies GmbH, Inffeldgasse 21b, A-8010, Graz, Austria
bEnergy Economics Group, Institute of Energy Systems and Electrical Drives, Vienna University of Technology, Gußhausstraße 25 e29/E37003, 1040,
Vienna, Austria
cXendee Corporation, 6540 Lusk Blvd., Suite C225, San Diego, CA 92121, USA
article info
Article history:Received 5 February 2021
Received in revised form9 July 2021Accepted 20 July 2021Available online 23 July 2021
Keywords:
Energy CommunitiesRenewable EnergyMicrogridsMILPOptimal Planning
Decarbonizationabstract
Local and renewable energy communities show a high potential for the ef ﬁcient use of distributed energy
technologies at regional levels according to the Clean Energy Package of the European Union. However,
until now there are only limited possibilities to bring such energy communities into reality because of
several limitation factors. Challenges are already encountered during the planning phase since a largenumber of decision variables have to be considered depending on the number and type of communityparticipants and distributed technologies. This paper overcomes these challenges by establishing a
mixed-integer linear programming based optimal planning approach for renewable energy communities.
A real case study is analyzed by creating an energy community testbed with a leading energy serviceprovider in Austria. The case study considers nine energy community members of a municipality in
Austria, distributed photovoltaic systems, energy storage systems, different electricity tariff scenarios and
market signals including feed-in tariffs. The key results indicate that renewable energy communities cansigniﬁcantly reduce the total energy costs by 15% and total carbon dioxide emissions by 34% through an
optimal selection and operation of the energy technologies. In all the optimization scenarios considered,
each community participant can bene ﬁt both economically and ecologically.
©2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND
license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).
1. Introduction
The decarbonization of the energy sector requires renewable
energy measures to enable a clean energy transition [ 1]. While
there are different actions and strategies undergoing, renewable
energy based microgrids are on the rise to contribute to affordable
and clean energy [ 2]. The renewable energy based microgrids
provide extensive opportunities in terms of different perspectives.
The environmental perspective of such microgrids has been pro-
vided by Tabar et al. [ 3] by proposing the sustainable planning of
hybrid microgrids towards minimizing the environmental pollu-
tion. The economic perspective of renewable energy based micro-
grids has been addressed by Basu et al. [ 4] by providing a
comprehensive survey of the microgrids. The social perspective of
renewable energy based microgrids has been highlighted bySchwaegerl and Tao [ 5] together with technical bene ﬁts of the
microgrid operation. The concept of energy sharing among
different actors of microgrids to reduce carbon emissions and
economic costs for infrastructure and services compared to a
business as usual case is one of the major advantages of renewable
energy based microgrids. This concept of energy sharing is
deployed through the setup of an Energy Community (EC) [ 6]. The
energy sharing in communities turns individual consumers into
prosumers, sharing the surplus energy with other members of the
microgrid.
1.1. Motivation and current status of energy communities in Austria
and EU
ECs hold a signi ﬁcant role in the clean energy transition pre-
sented by the Clean Energy Package (CEP) [ 7]. There are two types
of energy communities presented in CEP based on two different
directives. The Directive 2018/2001 [ 8] presents the Renewable
Energy Community (REC). The Directive 2019/944 [ 9] presents the
Citizen Energy Community (CEC). This research work is focused on*Corresponding author. BEST - Bioenergy and Sustainable Technologies GmbH,
Inffeldgasse 21b, A-8010, Graz, Austria.
E-mail address: muhammad.mansoor@best-research.eu (M. Mansoor).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Energy
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/energy
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2021.121559
0360-5442/ ©2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
).Energy 237 (2021) 121559

===PAGE 2===
a real case study of a microgrid based REC in Austria. For many EU
countries, the concept of energy sharing in communities is still new
from a legislative point of view [ 10]. In order to promote decen-
tralized energy supply and strengthen regional supply concepts,
RECs receive increased attention in Austria currently. Energy
communities are legally de ﬁned and anchored in the Erneuerbaren
Ausbaugesetzes (EAG) [ 11]. According to EAG x74 paragraph 1, a REC
can produce energy from renewable sources and consume, store or
sell the produced energy. Therefore, for each community member it
is possible to exchange energy from renewable sources (such as PV,
wind power, combined heat and power systems, fuel cells and
energy storage systems) within the de ﬁned community. The
membership is open to private individuals, small and medium-
sized enterprises (SMEs), public authorities (including municipal-
ities), climate and energy model regions, e5-communities (a com-
munity which ful ﬁlls certain rules to be more ef ﬁcient) and tourism
regions. To create a ﬁnancial incentive for the participants, a
reduced distribution grid tariff is introduced for the electricity
exchanged within the REC, as well as other ﬁnancial advantages
such as the cancellation of all electricity taxes and green electricity
fees.1.2. State-of-the-art literature review
The state-of-the-art literature review consists of the following
subjects: energy sharing in RECs, the current state of different
optimization models of RECs in microgrids and the application of
these models to the optimal planning of RECs in microgrids.
Energy sharing has been discussed extensively in the literature
recently, with a special focus on Peer-to-Peer (P2P) local markets
where energy surplus is traded. Park and Yong [ 12] have provided a
comprehensive review on the P2P electricity trading with a focus
on providing potential development and future challenges for
governments and private corporations that are interested in energy
sharing. A comprehensive review of existing P2P energy trading
projects has been provided by Zhang et al. in [ 13] with a focus on
their use in local energy microgrids. Recently, P2P energy sharing
has also been researched using decentralized models via bilateral
contracts, auction models and blockchain based models. The
Brooklyn Microgrid [ 14] considers a blockchain based microgrid
energy market to satisfy the request of the energy management.
Leong et al. [ 15] propose an auction based P2P energy trading
mechanism via a Bayesian game bidding strategy. Morstyn et al.Nomenclature
Abbreviations
DER distributed energy resources
DER-CAM distributed energy resources - customer adoption
model
DR demand rates
ESS energy storage system
HH household tariff
HWB hot water boiler tariff
LA local authority tariff
MILP mixed-integer linear programming
OC optimization case
P2P peer-to-peer
PV photovoltaic system
RC reference case
REC renewable energy community
SOC state of charge
Mathematical Symbols
d binary variable or parameter
h efﬁciency parameter
g cost constraint parameter
P annuity rate of the technology
r parameter for the state of the charge
Q loss factor
z energy rate associated with the electricity, V/kW or
V/kWh
C costs,V
Cap capacity of the technology, kW for PV and kWh for
ESS
E variable associated with the electricity, kW or kWh
ESS variable associated with the energy storage system
electricity, kW or kWh
FixC ﬁxed capital cost, V
N arbitrary large number
PV normalized photovoltaic performance, kW/kW p
VarC variable capital cost, V/kW or V/kWh
f charging or discharging rate of the storageSuperscript
gc grid connection
in input for storage
loss loss of stored energy
out output from storage
perf performance
ps purchase or sale
RecExp electricity related to the renewable energy
community export
RecPur electricity related to the renewable energy
community purchase
ref reference
stored state of the energy in the storage
trans transfer
UtExp electricity related to the utility export
UtFix ﬁxed utility fee
UtMax electricity related to the maximum utility purchase
UtPur electricity related to the utility purchase
XOR binary variable
ESSin electricity input to the energy storage system
ESSons onsite usage of the electricity related to the energy
storage system
ESSout electricity output of the energy storage system
ESSRecExp exported energy storage system electricity to the
renewable energy community
Subscripts
char charge rate of the storage
dis discharge rate of the storage
invest annualized investment
lim limit on the costs
O&M operation and maintenance
tech technologies
up upfront
d daytypes
h hours
m months
n,n0nodes: n and n0are aliases
t timeA. Cosic, M. Stadler, M. Mansoor et al. Energy 237 (2021) 121559
2

===PAGE 3===
[16] propose P2P energy trading via bilateral contracts for a new
scalable market design. Long et al. [ 17] have investigated energy
sharing for different Distributed Energy Resource (DER) producers
in a community microgrid with PV and battery systems. Reihani
et al. [ 18] propose a framework to consider energy sharing that
allows energy buyers to reduce their energy costs by exchanging
energy with neighbouring peers and local utility. Cui et al. [ 19]
present an ef ﬁcient energy sharing mechanism for various pro-
sumers in an energy community. A recent study by Lin et al. [ 20]
considers the optimal energy sharing of solar PV, wind power and
battery among different residential houses with a time resolution
of only 24-hours. The studies mentioned above consider the
renewable and battery energy sharing among the microgrid par-
ticipants based only on the operation phenomenon, neglecting the
optimal investment of the DER technologies. It is completely
different to optimally design a microgrid with DER investments and
optimal energy sharing than just operate the already established
microgrids. It is because of the fact that the ﬁxed sizing of the DER
technologies of the already established microgrids can pose certain
limitations on the energy sharing among participants. Moreover,
the variability of renewable energy technologies such as solar PVand wind power can affect the energy sharing among microgrid
participants in different times of the year. Hence, an optimal
renewable energy sharing mechanism can not be guaranteed.
Therefore, it is important to develop certain models which consider
both the optimal planning of microgrids and the optimal energy
sharing from DER technologies in an energy community setup with
at least a yearly time horizon.
Microgrids connect various renewable energy resources and
create a dynamic and complex integrated energy system [ 21]. The
optimal planning of such microgrids within the REC infrastructure
requires advanced modeling techniques that can bring such sys-
tems into reality. It is mainly due to the large number of decision
variables related to the number of community participants and the
distributed technologies involved. Huang et al. [ 22] propose a
Mixed-Integer Linear Programming (MILP) based peer-to-peer en-
ergy trading mechanism in a microgrid with a distributed PV and
battery energy storage system. The objective function considered is
the minimization of the total energy costs of all individual partic-
ipants of the microgrid. The capacities of the technologies were
assumed to be ﬁxed in the case study. Although the previously
mentioned study contributes towards renewable energy based
microgrids, it can not be applied to the optimal planning of such
microgrids in RECs. Fleischhacker et al. [ 23] use an open source
model to perform portfolio optimization to establish an energy
community in a city district. Although the complex multi-energy
system proposed in [ 23] considers the minimization of the costs
and carbon emissions on a district level, it is limited in providing an
optimal planning of RECs with different utility tariffs, demand rates
and market signals including feed-in-tariffs for a microgrid. Also,
different clustering techniques have been used to disaggregate the
time-series input data, which makes the optimization models
vulnerable with respect to time series connectivity of technologies.
To overcome this disadvantage, full-scale yearly optimization
techniques based on 8760-hours have been used recently for the
planning of renewable energy microgrids such as the optimalplanning of a thermal energy system with a seasonal storage in [ 24],
a performance comparison of two different MILP-based models
including 8760-hours for 13 different microgrid case studies in [ 25]
and the use of a 8760-hours modeling approach for the optimal
planning of microgrid technologies including hydrogen electro-
lyzer, hydrogen seasonal storage and hydrogen mobility for a case
study in Austria in [ 26]. Zwickl-Bernhard and Auer [ 27]h a v e
recently examined a cost minimizing energy technology portfolio
using an open source energy model with MILP for an energycommunity in Vienna, Austria. Although the study reported in [ 27]
supports sustainable urban energy planning in the community
structure, it is limited in not using the full-scale optimization and
also not considering the yearly operational energy scheduling of
the technology portfolio.
The mechanism of renewable energy sharing within the com-
munity participants can be pro ﬁtable if the self-consumption of
renewable electricity generated is increased. The aggregation of the
load of different prosumers can also increase the pro ﬁtability. Fina
et al. [ 28] have analyzed the sharing of rooftop PV generation in
multi-apartment buildings. The maximization of the value of PV in
apartment buildings with different arrangements have been stud-
ied in [ 29]. Fleischhacker et al. [ 30] have proposed a game theoretic
model with a welfare maximization for the shared use of a solar PV
and energy storage system in a multi-apartment building. These
previously mentioned studies only consider the application of
renewable energy transfer in apartment buildings. It is necessary to
diversify the application of the optimization models and include
different kind of end users to have a genuine concept of a com-
munity setup. It is also important to have a mixture of prosumers
and consumers inside an energy community to realize differentenergy sharing mechanisms. A recent study by Perger et al. [ 31]
considers a linear optimization model with different prosumers
(apartments, businesses, etc.) in an energy community concept for
energy sharing under willingness-to-pay criteria. The energy tariffs
considered by Perger et al. [ 31] for the purchase and sale of the
energy to the grid and within the community are ﬁxed retail
electricity prices. Another recent study by Jiang et al. [ 32] considers
a two-stage optimization model for renewable energy sharing
among prosumers and consumers of an energy community setup.
The optimization model considered by Jiang et al. [ 32] is based on a
single day i.e.24-hours time horizon and considers time-of-use
tariffs only. Both Perger et al. [ 31] and Jiang et al. [ 32] assume
same energy prices for all participants (prosumers and consumers)
and do not consider demand charges and variable market signals
including feed-in tariffs. Therefore, the applications of such opti-
mization models are limited and different electricity tariff scenarios
and market signals including feed-in tariffs should be considered to
realize the real-life renewable energy based community microgrid
setups.
1.3. Contribution beyond the state-of-the-art
This research work overcomes the above mentioned gaps in the
state-of-the-art and goes beyond it. The main contribution of this
research work relative to the already existing studies is provided
below:
A key difference to the existing literature is the development of
an advanced MILP framework for the optimal planning and the
optimal operation dispatch with the option of transferring
renewable energy between the energy community participants
(nodes), combined with newly introduced node-speci ﬁc time-of-
use electricity rates and market signals using a full-scale optimi-
zation horizon. A real case study is analyzed for both the optimalinvestment and operation dispatch planning of a renewable energy
community testbed in a microgrid setup with a leading energy
service provider in Austria. Although other technologies can be
considered, this REC considers multiple PV and Energy Storage
System (ESS) as decentralized and centralized technologies in the
community. The REC testbed considers nine diversi ﬁed community
participants (three households, three apartments, a government
institution, a ﬁreﬁghting station and a bank) connected to the
utility grid. The developed MILP model considers each participant
as a separate node of the microgrid system with a full-scale time
horizon i.e.8760-hours. Three different reference and optimizationA. Cosic, M. Stadler, M. Mansoor et al. Energy 237 (2021) 121559
3

===PAGE 4===
cases are analyzed and considered with the corresponding MILP
model using different electricity tariff scenarios and market signals
including feed-in tariffs.
The presented MILP model considers three different reference
cases without renewable energy transfer. The ﬁrst reference case
represents the current status of the participants and considers the
existing PV systems without demand rates. The second and third
reference cases are green ﬁeld scenarios and consider only the
utility purchase (no existing PV) without demand rates (second
reference case) and with demand rates (third reference case). After
setting up the reference cases, the optimization is performed
relative to each reference case, where the renewable energy
transfer is enabled among the community participants and further
investment options are enabled. For all cases, the total annual en-
ergy costs and the total annual CO 2emissions of the energy com-
munity are calculated through a cost minimization of the MILP
model. The results include the optimal sizing and the full-year
operational dispatch of the technologies. Furthermore, the results
also include the comparisons with the reference cases in terms of
the energy costs and CO 2savings, the total annual energy costs per
node and the distributed renewable energy to each node for thedifferent tariff scenarios.
This paper is structured as follows: Section 2describes the
detailed formulation of the optimization problem. Section 3pro-
vides the detailed information of the case study and its testing.
Section 4discusses the detailed results followed by the conclusion
in Section 5.
2. Mathematical formulation of the optimization problem
The methodology considers an optimization model using a MILP
framework based on the Distributed Energy Resources - Customer
Adoption Model (DER-CAM) [ 33] and further developed within this
research to include the additional decision variables for the surplus
energy at a single node, the energy transfer between multiple
nodes with the corresponding ﬁnancial constraints and different
electricity tariff scenarios with a yearly time horizon. A major dif-
ference to the existing literature is the new option for the renew-
able energy transfer between the nodes (community members)
combined with the newly introduced node-speci ﬁc time-of-use
electricity rates using a full-scale optimization horizon (i.e. a full
linked year). With this time horizon, volatile energy supply systems
as well as seasonal energy transfer can be considered directly and
hourly based electricity rates can be considered in the optimization.
Therefore, this MILP framework considers the full-scale optimiza-
tion i.e.8760-hours by extending the previously MILP framework
(with time series in terms of 24-hours based three representative
daytypes for each month) having months m2{1, 2,…, 12}, day-
types d2{1, 2, 3} and hours h2{1, 2,…, 24} [ 34] with t2{1, 2,…,
8760}.
2.1. Objective function
The MILP optimization framework minimizes the total energy
costs, the total CO
2emissions of a REC and it considers different
utility rates of the individual participants. In this case, the optimi-
zation is performed from the perspective of the operator of a REC
and thus according to the community total energy costs. The
simpli ﬁed objective function related to the total annual energy
costs Ccan be represented by eq. (1).
C¼X
nCn¼X
n X
techDERinvest þX
tCutility þX
tCO&M!
(1)
where Cnis the annual energy cost per node, DER invest is theannualized investment cost per technology tech and Cutility is
related to the electrical purchase minus sales to the utility grid or to
the community members. The CO&Mvariable is related to the
operation and maintenance costs.
DER invest can be further described as shown in eq. (2)and eq. (3).
DER invest ¼X
techðCupPtechÞ (2)
Cup¼VarCtechCaptechþFixCtech (3)
where Cupare the upfront capital costs of the technology, Ptechis
the annuity rate of the technology, which gives the present value of
the technology in terms of the annuity, the interest rate, and the
number of annuities i.e.lifetime of the technology, VarC techare the
variable capital costs of the technology, Cap techis the technology
capacity to be invested and FixC techare the ﬁxed capital costs of the
technology. The variable capital costs vary with the amount of ca-
pacity that is invested, while the ﬁxed capital costs are independent
of the size of the technology and can cover engineering costs.
To accurately re ﬂect the additional cost possibilities for the
renewable energy transfer within a REC, two new cost variables
have been added to the total Cutility costs, which are further
described in eq. (4). Furthermore, all electricity rates related to the
utility purchase are node-speci ﬁc in this model, so that different
tariff scenarios for each node and customer can be tracked
explicitly.
X
n;tCutility ¼X
n;tEUtPur
n;tzUtPur
n;t/C0X
n;tEUtExp
n;tzUtExp
t þX
nCUtFix
n
þX
n;tEUtMax
n;tzUtMax
n;tþX
n;tERecPur
n;tzRecPur
/C0X
n;tERecExp
n;tzRecExp(4)
where EUtPur
n;tis the purchased electricity from the utility at node
n,zUtPur
n;tis the node-speci ﬁc TOU-rate for the electricity purchase
from the utility, EUtExp
n;tis the exported electricity to the utility at
node nandzUtExp
t is the rate for the electricity export. CUtFix
n is the
yearly utility fee at node n,EUtMax
n;t is the maximum purchased
electricity from the utility during the whole year at node nand
zUtMax
n;tis the node-speci ﬁc yearly power demand rate. Note that the
REC-based electricity purchase and export prices are different as
described in the case study below addressed in section 3.
ERecPur
n;t is the newly introduced purchased electricity from other
REC members at node n,zRecPuris the energy community rate for
the REC-based electricity purchase de ﬁned by the community
operator, ERecExp
n;t is the exported electricity to the REC at node nand
zRecExpis the de ﬁned rate for the electricity export to the REC.
Furthermore, in order to avoid higher individual costs for each
participant (node) in a community setup, the total annual energy
costs per node Cncan also be limited in the optimization by the cost
constraint of Clim
naccording to the eq. (5)and eq. (6)so that the
individual costs per node/client in the REC are not exceeding the
individual reference costs.
Clim
n¼ð1þgÞCref
n (5)
Cn/C20Clim
n (6)
where Cref
nare the costs associated with the reference case at
node nand gis the cost constraint parameter responsible forA. Cosic, M. Stadler, M. Mansoor et al. Energy 237 (2021) 121559
4

===PAGE 5===
limiting the total annual energy costs per node.
The simpli ﬁed objective function related to the total annual
carbon dioxide emissions can be represented by eq. (7). It is the
summation of the carbon dioxide emissions occurred in providing
the electricity from the grid at each node n. Carbon dioxide emis-
sions from other technologies such as a combined heat and power
system running on natural gas can be considered in principle, but
only electricity from grid is considered as a source of carbon dioxide
emissions in this study.
CO2¼X
n;tCO2grid (7)
2.2. Technology constraints
The case study addressed in sub-section 3considers mainly two
distributed energy technologies for the production and storage of
renewable energy shared within the REC, including the photovol-
taic (PV) technology and the energy storage system (ESS), since this
is the major focus of the current legislation.
The electricity provided by the PV technology is given by eq. (8).
Esolar
n;t¼CapPV
nPVperf
n;t(8)
where Esolar
n;tis the electricity provided by the solar PV technol-
ogy at node n,CapPV
nis the capacity of the solar PV technology at
node nand PVperf
n;tis the normalized solar PV performance at the
corresponding location, which depends on the location, orienta-
tion, temperature and panel types.
The energy storage system (ESS) can be represented by eq. (9).
ESSstored
n;t¼ESSstored
n;t/C01þESSin
n;t/C0ESSout
n;t/C0ESSloss
n;t (9)
where ESSstored
n;trepresents the State of Charge (SoC) of the ESS at
node n,ESSin
n;tis the input for ESS, ESSout
n;tis the output from the
energy storage, ESSloss
n;tis the energy lost in the ESS. The energy
losses can be represented by eq. (10).
ESSloss
n;t¼ESSstored
n;t/C01QESS (10)
where QESSis the coef ﬁcient of loss for the ESS. The energy
storage constraints are given by eq. (11-16) .
ESSstored
n;t/C20CapESS
n (11)
CapESS
nrmin
SoC/C20ESSstored
n;t/C20CapESS
nrmax
SoC (12)
ESSin
n;t¼EESSin
n;thchar/C20CapESS
nfmax
char(13)
ESSout
n;t¼EESSout
n;thdis/C20CapESS
nfmax
dis(14)
ESSin
n;t/C20ESSXOR
n;tN (15)
ESSout
n;t/C20ð1/C0ESSXOR
n;tÞN (16)
where CapESS
nis the capacity of the ESS at node n,rmin
SoCandrmaxSoC
are the minimum and maximum SOCs of the ESS, hcharandhdisare
the charging and discharging ef ﬁciencies of the ESS, fmax
charandfmax
disare the maximum charging and discharging rates of the ESS, ESSXOR
n;t
is the binary input for avoiding simultaneous charging and dis-
charging of the ESS at node nand Nis an arbitrary large number.
2.3. Energy balance and constraints
In a REC constellation the electricity provided by the solar PV
technology at node nEsolar
n;tcan be divided into three PV electricity
components, corresponding to three decision variables given by eq.
(17)
Esolar
n;t¼Eonsite
n;tþEUtExp
n;tþERecExp
n;t(17)
where Eonsite
n;tis the onsite usage of the electricity provided by
the PV technology at node n, which can be used to satisfy the de-
mand or charge the onsite battery at node n,if one exists. EExpUt
n;tis
the exported PV electricity to the utility and ERecExp
n;t is the exported
PV electricity to the REC participants at node nwhen there is a
demand for electricity.
The constraints given by eqs. (18) and (19) serve to prevent
simultaneous import and export to/from the utility if a grid
connection exists, i.e. binary parameter dgcs0, otherwise both
EUtPur
n;tand EUtExp
n;twill be ﬁxed at zero.
EUtPur
n;t/C20/C16
dps
n;tdgc/C17
N (18)
EUtExp
n;t/C20/C16/C16
1/C0dps
n;t/C17
dgc/C17
N (19)
where dps
n;tis related to the binary electricity purchase or sell
decision variable at node nand Nis an arbitrary large number.
Moreover, the electricity which is stored and provided by the
ESS technology at node ncan also be divided into two ESS com-
ponents, corresponding to two decision variables given by eq. (20)
EESSout
n;t¼EESSons
n;tþEESSRecExp
n;t(20)
where EESSons
n;t is the onsite usage of the electricity provided by
the ESS at node nand EESSRecExp
n;t is the exported ESS electricity to the
REC. Note that in this REC model also centralized community PV
and ESS technologies are possible as long as a node nfor a
“centralized ”technology location has been speci ﬁed. Thus, the
model can make decisions on decentralized individual PV and ESS
technologies at each node/building and also provide electricity
from PV and ESS for the entire REC in one location.
For the renewable energy transfer option within the REC a new
transfer variable has been introduced given by eq. (21)
X
n0Etrans
n;n0;t¼ERecExp
n;tþEESSRecExp
n;t(21)
where Etrans
n;n0;tis related to the renewable energy transfer from
node nto node n0and is given by the sum of the total exported
electricity from the PV and ESS technology within the REC. This is
also the total electricity amount that can be purchased by other
community members from a node n.
The higher level energy balance equation for the overall model
is given by eq. (22).
EUtPur
n;tþX
n0Etrans
n;n0;tþEonsite
n;tþEESSons
n;tþEUtExp
n;t
¼Eload
n;tþEESSin
n;tþEsales
n;t(22)A. Cosic, M. Stadler, M. Mansoor et al. Energy 237 (2021) 121559
5

===PAGE 6===
where Eload
n;tis the electrical load demand at node nand Esales
n;tare
the total remaining electricity sales to the utility at node n.
3. Case study
This section includes the details and the approach of designing
the real case study for a small-scale REC testbed with nine com-
munity participants in a village in Carinthia, Austria of which six are
consumers and three are prosumers with an existing PV system. It
also includes the time series data analysis, the technical and
economical details of the technologies, assumptions and the opti-
mization strategy.
3.1. Renewable energy community
The setup of the testbed is based on the characteristics of a
typical REC aiming to share the renewable energy produced within
the community at a local level. In addition to the necessary tech-
nical setup of the REC, the project focuses on the active participa-
tion of citizens, community and local initiatives in order to create a
solution that fully exploits the positive effects of a REC.
In the municipality of this village in Carinthia, a total of nine
project participants have agreed to participate in a REC consisting
of the local authority, a ﬁre department, a bank, a residential
building (two households and one electrical hot water boiler pro-
ﬁle) and three single-family households. In addition, the ﬁre
department has an existing PV system with a peak power of 17.68
kW pand two of the single-family households have already a PV
system with a peak power of 4.2 kW pand 2.6 kW p, where the
surplus PV electricity is sold to the utility at a certain feed-in tariff
in the reference case. By transferring to an REC, the surplus PV
electricity produced by the individual participants can be distrib-
uted to the community members (nodes) at a reduced network
tariff, which means that less electricity has to be purchased from
the public grid, thus saving costs and carbon emissions. Moreover,
green ﬁeld scenarios without existing PV technologies are also
considered in order to ﬁnd the optimal investment decisions for
this REC and whether the total energy costs can be further reduced
through the expansion of renewable energies. Furthermore, allparticipants are located on one network level (low voltage distri-
bution network). The current network topology of the REC testbedwith the existing technologies is shown in Fig. 1 . Although the in-
vestments in PV and ESS are considered in a centralized approach
in this topology, further decentralized investments in PV and ESS
are also possible in each individual node together with the existing
decentralized technologies.
3.2. Time series input data analysis and assumptions
The responsible Distribution System Operator (DSO) in this re-
gion is the KNG-K €arnten Netz GmbH, who are co-initiators of this
REC project and provided the electrical load pro ﬁle data of the
community. The electrical load pro ﬁles of the individual partici-
pants are synthetically generated load pro ﬁles based on real smart-
meter measurements in a 15 min time interval for a whole year. The
hourly based electric load data are shown in Figs. 2e3.
Moreover, the corresponding histograms for each demand are
shown in Fig. 4 to provide a visual representation of the electrical
Fig. 1. The network topology of the renewable energy community testbed at a village in Carinthia (Austria) with central investment options and other existin g technologies.
Fig. 2. The hourly electrical demand pro ﬁle of node 1 e4.A. Cosic, M. Stadler, M. Mansoor et al. Energy 237 (2021) 121559
6

===PAGE 7===
load data distributions in relation to the number of hours.
Furthermore, the maximum power and yearly electricity con-
sumption for each community participant (node) and type are re-
ported in Table 1 . The total annual consumption of the whole REC is
approximately 63,902 kWh/a with an hourly peak load of 18.32kW pwhen the individual electricity consumptions are aggregated
to a total load.
For the determination of the electricity provided by the existing
PV technologies at the location the solar PV performance is
required at the site. The solar PV performance is retrieved from
Meteonorm [ 35] with an hourly time horizon. Meteonorm explic-
itly provides the hourly values of the PV performance of a typical
medium sized plant with crystalline silicon modules and an ef ﬁ-
cient inverter for a whole year. These data are shown in Fig. 5 . The
technological and economical parameters of the PV technology are
addressed in sub-section 3.3.
In order to assess the CO 2emissions correctly, the CO 2content of
the purchased electricity from the utility also needs to be consid-
ered. The marginal CO 2emissions rate of the purchased electricity
is considered in kg/kWh in this study and is shown in Fig. 6 [36]o n
hourly basis for the whole year. The marginal CO 2emissions rate is
based on the Austrian-mix and import-mix electricity sources. The
marginal CO 2emissions only consider the direct emissions of the
fuel while generating the electricity and do not include the indirect
emissions related to the fuel production and transportation.
3.3. Techno-economical parameters
The economical parameters for the solar PV and ESS include the
investment parameters like ﬁxed capital costs, variable capital
costs, ﬁxed maintenance costs and lifetime. These parameters are
Fig. 3. The hourly electrical demand pro ﬁle of node 5 e9.
Fig. 4. The corresponding histograms for each electrical demand.A. Cosic, M. Stadler, M. Mansoor et al. Energy 237 (2021) 121559
7

===PAGE 8===
given in Table 2 [37,38]. For the ESS a Lithium-ion based battery is
considered. The lifetime of such Lithium-based batteries results
from the stated manufacturer's warranty of ten years at a discharge
depth of 100% [ 39]. In order to minimize battery degradation and
prolong the usage of the stored renewable energy, the ESS is only
operated in a SOC range of 20 e100%, which according to [ 40] can
increase the lifetime (more precisely the number of charge cycles)
by 50%. Therefore a lifetime of 15 years is assumed for the ESS in
this study. The interest rate is considered as 2%, which is needed for
the calculation of the annuity rate for each technology.
The technical parameters for the energy storage system include
the charging and discharging ef ﬁciencies, the maximum charge and
discharge rates, the minimum and maximum SOC and the self-
discharge rate (losses) of a typical Lithium-Ion ESS. These param-
eters are given in Table 3 [39,41].
In Austria, the total electricity tariff is divided into three main
components consisting of an energy, a grid and a fees component
with the last two components regulated by law and dependent on
the respective region [ 42e44]. Furthermore, the Austrian sales tax
of 20% must also be taken into account. The energy component of
the electricity tariff for the utility purchase is based on the KELAG
Home Basic tariff [ 45], which is commonly used for households
(HH) at this site, and a special tariff for the local authority (LA) and
the electrical hot water boiler (HWB) de ﬁned by the local energy
supplier. Furthermore, in this case study a distinction is made be-
tween two different tariff scenarios. The ﬁrst scenario refers to a
pure consumption tariff without variable power demand rates for
all REC members and is therefore called “Scenario Without-DR ”in
this study. In the second scenario there is a variable power demand
rate in the grid tariff component, which refers to the yearly peakTable 1
The maximum hourly power and annual electrical load of each community participant.
Node Type Maximum Hourly Power
[kW]Annual Energy
[kWh] per year
1 Local Authority 10.52 19,972.69
2 Fire Fighting Station 1.98 5,171.553 Apartment 1.26 378.104 Apartment 1.65 1,395.145 Apartment (Hot Water Boiler) 2.84 1,816.81
6 Household 5.03 14,093.83
7 Bank 3.13 9,452.838 Household 2.23 1,803.639 Household 3.25 9,817.13
Table 2The economic parameters of the microgrid technologies [ 37,38].
Technology Fixed Costs Variable Costs Fixed Maintenance Costs Lifetime
[V][ V/kW or kWh for ESS] [ V/kW or kWh for ESS] per year [Years]
PV 0 842 9 25
ESS 0 434 0 15
Fig. 5. The solar PV performance data on hourly basis at the site [ 35].
Fig. 6. The hourly marginal CO 2emissions of the utility electricity [ 36].Table 3
The technical parameters of the Li-ion based ESS [ 39,41].
Parameter Value
Charging Ef ﬁciency of ESS [%] 95
Discharging Ef ﬁciency of ESS [%] 95
Maximum Charge Rate [% per hour] 34Maximum Discharge Rate [% per hour] 34Minimum SOC of ESS [%] 20Maximum SOC of ESS [%] 100Self-Discharge Rate of ESS [% per hour] 0.2A. Cosic, M. Stadler, M. Mansoor et al. Energy 237 (2021) 121559
8

===PAGE 9===
load of each REC participant, and thus is called “Scenario With-DR ”.
The tariffs are summarized into a variable ( Vc/kWh), a ﬁxed (V/a)
and a peak load-related ( V/kW p/a) cost component for the opti-
mization, which results in the following cost breakdown for the
different tariff scenarios and participant types given in Table 4 .
According to the current status of the negotiations surrounding
the EAG, it can be assumed that the variable part of the grid
component for the shared electricity within the REC will be
reduced by at least 60% in order to create additional ﬁnancial in-
centives for community members in Austria. In addition, the vari-
able part of the fees cost component is also to be abolished. The
energy price is determined by the operator of the REC or by the
community participants. In this study, energy rates of 4 Vc/kWh are
considered, which is equal to the ﬁxed feed-in tariff to the utility of
4Vc/kWh and corresponds to the current community situation
with the existing PV technologies. For the green ﬁeld investment
scenarios it is assumed that no energy rates have to be paid and are
therefore considered to be 0 Vc/kWh. The cost structure and the
summarized variable energy community tariff for the purchased
electricity from the REC is given in Table 5 .
In addition to the ﬁxed feed-in tariff zUtExp
t of 4Vc/kWh, also
time-variable rates for the PV surplus electricity sales to the utility
are considered in other green ﬁeld optimization scenarios. This is
signiﬁcantly important to show how the REC reacts with differentmarket signals. For this the Austrian spot market prices on an
hourly basis are used. This market price history is shown in Fig. 7
[46].
3.4. Optimization framework and strategy
The case study considers three different reference cases (RC) and
three different optimization cases (OC) in a REC constellation
related to the corresponding reference case and where the
renewable energy transfer among the community participants is
enabled. The different scenarios are reported in Table 6 . For all
cases, the total annual energy costs and the total annual CO 2
emissions are calculated through a cost minimization of the opti-mization model. The energy costs include the investment costs
related to the PV and ESS technologies together with the electricity
purchase or sales from the utility or the REC. The CO
2emissions
include the total marginal carbon dioxide emissions of the elec-
tricity purchase from the utility.
Theﬁrst reference case RC-Without-DR-PV represents the cur-
rent status of the participants and considers the three existing PV
systems using the technical and economical parameters reported in
sub-section 3.3. In this reference case, the tariff scenario without
demand rates is considered for the utility purchase, which is giveninTable 4 . Furthermore, in this reference case, the PV surplus can
only be fed into the grid at a ﬁxed feed-in tariff of 4 Vc/kWh. The
associated optimization case OC-Without-DR-PV determines by
how much the total PV self-consumption of the REC can be
increased and thus how much total annual energy costs and total
annual CO
2emissions can be saved with the prevailing tariff sce-
nario when the renewable energy transfer between the partici-
pants is enabled.
The second and third reference cases i.e. RC-Without-DR and
RC-With-DR are so-called green ﬁeld scenarios with different tariff
schemes in each case (one without and one with demand rates),
where no existing PV technologies are considered. The corre-
sponding investment and optimization cases OC-Without-DR and
OC-With-DR determine how much is invested in new PV and ESSTable 4
The individual and summarized electricity tariff components in the REC.
Tariff Component Unit Without-DR With-DR
HH LA HWB HH LA HWB
Energy V/a 39 8 0 39 8 0
Vc/kWh 6.79 4.53 6.25 6.79 4.53 6.25
Grid V/a 65.21 65.21 65.21 27.96 27.96 27.96
V/kW p/a 0 0 0 13.79 13.79 13.79
Vc/kWh 6.53 6.53 6.53 6.07 6.07 6.07
Fees V/a 37.35 37.35 37.35 37.35 37.35 37.35
Vc/kWh 3.49 3.49 3.49 3.49 3.49 3.49
Sales Tax % 20 20 20 20 20 20
zUtPur
n;t- Variable Cost Incl. Tax Vc/kWh 20.17 17.46 19.52 19.62 16.91 18.97
zUtMax
n;t- Peak Load Cost Incl. Tax V/kW p/a 0 0 0 16.55 16.55 16.55
CUtFix
n - Fixed Cost Incl. Tax V/a 169.87 131.17 121.57 125.17 87.97 78.37
Table 5
The energy community tariff components and the summarized variable cost for thepurchased electricity from the REC.
REC tariff component Unit Without-DR With-DR
HH, LA, HWB HH, LA, HWB
Energy Vc/kWh 0 or 4 0 or 4
Grid Vc/kWh 2.61 2.43
Fees Vc/kWh 0 0
Sales Tax % 20 20
zRECPur- Variable Cost Incl. Tax Vc/kWh 3.13 or 7.93 2.92 or 7.72
Table 6
Different scenarios for the optimization and testing framework.
Scenario Description
RC-Without-DR-PV Reference case: existing PV and without demand rates
RC-Without-DR Reference case: no existing PV; only utility purchase and without demand rates
RC-With-DR Reference case: no existing PV; only utility purchase and with demand ratesOC-Without-DR-PV Optimization: existing PV and without demand rates; no additional investmentsOC-Without-DR Optimization: enabled investments and without demand ratesOC-With-DR Optimization: enabled investments and with demand ratesA. Cosic, M. Stadler, M. Mansoor et al. Energy 237 (2021) 121559
9

===PAGE 10===
technologies, and thus how much energy costs and CO 2emissions
can be saved in a REC with the optimally chosen technology ca-
pacities and enabling the renewable energy transfer. In both
green ﬁeld investment optimization cases, the spot market prices
given in Fig. 7 are used for the PV surplus sales to the utility. The
assumptions for all optimization scenarios are summarized in
Table 7 .
For all cases, the total annual energy costs and the total annual
CO2emissions are calculated through a cost minimization of the
optimization model. The results include the optimal sizing and the
full-year operational dispatch of the technologies. Furthermore, the
results also include the comparisons with the reference cases in
terms of the energy cost and CO 2savings, the total annual energy
costs per node and the distributed renewable energy to each node
for the different tariff scenarios. The optimality gap of the optimi-
zation solver was set to 0.2% for all scenarios. The MILP optimiza-
tion was performed on a server with a Common KVM processor
CPU 3.7 GHz and 224 GB of RAM.
4. Results
This section provides the results of the reference cases and the
corresponding optimization scenarios for each node based on the
different electricity tariff scenarios.4.1. Current status with existing technologies
First, the current status of the community participants is
determined with the reference case scenario RC-Without-DR-PV.
For this, the total electricity purchase from the grid, the produced
PV electricity provided by the existing PV technologies and the
respective share of the onsite PV usage, the total annual energy
costs and the total annual CO 2emissions are calculated for each
node through a cost minimization using the time series input data
and techno-economical parameters given in sub-sections 3.2and
3.3respectively.
The calculated total annual energy costs per node of the RC-
Without-DR-PV reference case scenario are used as node-speci ﬁc
cost constraints for the optimization scenario OC-Without-DR-PV,
where the renewable electricity transfer between the participants
is possible. The REC participants who provide the renewable elec-
tricity to the REC ( zRECExp) get the same energy rate as if they sold
the electricity to the grid ( zUtExp), i.e. 4 Vc/kWh. This means that the
participants who sell the electricity to the other community
members are not economically disadvantaged in the new REC
setup. The results for the whole REC obtained from the reference(RC-Without-DR-PV) and optimization scenario (OC-Without-DR-
PV) are given in Table 8 . The node-speci ﬁc results can be found in
theAppendix A (Tables A1 and A2).
In total, an average annual PV generation of 25,083.21 kWh/a is
available for the entire REC, where the existing PV systems have an
aggregated peak power of 24.48 kW
p. In the reference scenario,
only 6,648.19 kWh/a of the total PV generation is used for own
demand (PV-Onsite), which corresponds to an average, percentage
own demand coverage of approx. 26.5%. This means that the ma-
jority of the produced PV electricity is available as surplus and in
this case must be fed into the grid. Through a transition to a REC,
the PV own use of the community can be further increased, since in
this case, the renewable electricity transfer between the commu-
nity participants is enabled. Fig. 8 shows how the renewable energy
is optimally distributed within the REC according to the cost
minimization and how much each participant can purchase from
the REC with the corresponding cost savings.
The optimization results show that the total PV own use of the
REC can be increased from 6,648.19 kWh/a (26.5%) to
16,342.9 kWh/a (65.2%) as a result of the additional REC-Purchase
within the community. This is due to the introduced possibility of
the renewable electricity transfer between nodes, so that the
electricity demand of each community participant can be satis ﬁed
with the provided renewable electricity of the PV surplus. Through
this additional possibility to purchase renewable electricity from
the REC, the total annual energy costs can be reduced by 8.73% as
Fig. 7. The hourly EPEX spot market prices for the year 2019 in Austria [ 46].
Table 7
The assumptions made regarding the REC-Purchase and Utility Sales for all optimization scenarios.
Scenario zRECPur- REC-Purchase
[Vc/kWh]zRECExp- REC-Export
[Vc/kWh]zUtExp
t - Utility Sales
[Vc/kWh]
OC-Without-DR-PV 7.93 4 4
OC-Without-DR 3.13 0 Market PricesOC-With-DR 2.92 0 Market Prices
Table 8The results of the reference and optimization scenarios (RC-Without-DR-PV and OC-Without-DR-PV) calculated through a cost minimization.
Scenario PV
[kW]PV-Onsite
[kWh/a]REC-Purchase
[kWh/a]Community Energy Costs
[V/a]Cost Savings
[%]Community CO
2Emissions
[kg-CO 2/a]CO2Savings
[%]
RC-Without-DR-PV 24.48 6,648.19 e 12,976.25 e 13,879.25 e
OC-Without-DR-PV 24.48 6,648.19 9,694.71 11,843.70 8.73 11,839.45 14.70A. Cosic, M. Stadler, M. Mansoor et al. Energy 237 (2021) 121559
10

===PAGE 11===
the renewable electricity is purchased at a reduced energy com-
munity tariff rate (see Table 5 ). Moreover, since renewable elec-
tricity is purchased, the total annual CO 2emissions can be reduced
by 14.7% within the REC at the same time. Note that this only ap-
plies to CO 2emissions within the local network and not the wider
distribution grid. Furthermore, it can be seen from Fig. 8 that node 2
is exporting more PV electricity than any other node since it has the
biggest PV capacity installed and, accordingly, the largest PV sur-
plus is generated on this node, which is exported and distributed to
the participants in the most cost-optimal way. Therefore, the total
electricity transfer from node 2 to other nodes can be analyzed in
terms of an operational dispatch through Figure A1 in the Appendix
A.
4.2. Green ﬁeld investment scenarios
In addition to the current community status, reference cases
without existing PV technologies are also considered, i.e. RC-
Without-DR and RC-With-DR. These scenarios correspond to the
green ﬁeld scenarios, where the whole electricity demand is
satisﬁed by the purchase from the grid with the different tariff
scenarios given in Table 4 . The calculated total annual energy costs
per node of both RC-Without-DR and RC-With-DR reference case
scenarios are again used as cost constraints for the investment
scenarios OC-Without-DR and OC-With-DR, where the renewable
electricity transfer among the participants is enabled if a renewable
generation system is selected through the performed cost optimi-
zations. In these optimization scenarios, investments in PV gener-
ation system and ESS are considered in a centralized node. All the
community nodes are connected with each other, also with thiscentral investment node and utility grid for electricity sharing. Thecentralized investment node provides advantage over enabling the
decentralized investments because the community can avoid the
building retro ﬁt costs and reduce the technology installation costs.
Moreover, the centralized PV and ESS are much easier to maintain
and monitor on the community level. The produced surplus elec-
tricity is sold to the utility at time-variable market prices on an
hourly basis, which are shown in Fig. 7 . The total results of the
reference cases (RC-Without-DR and RC-With-DR) together with
the investment decisions and objective function savings obtained
from the optimization scenarios (OC-Without-DR and OC-With-
DR) are given in Table 9 . The node-speci ﬁc results can be found in
theAppendix A (Tables A3 eA5).
Based on the obtained results given in Table 9 , it can be seen that
for both optimization scenarios, the cost minimization invests in PV
technologies. In the OC-With-DR scenario, the PV capacity is being
selected even larger than in the OC-Without-DR scenario. This is
due to the fact that in this OC-With-DR scenario, investments are
also made in a ESS technology, which means that additional PV
electricity can be stored, resulting in a larger PV capacity invest-
ment and allowing more renewable electricity to be shared within
the REC. Moreover, the reason for also investing in an additional ESS
in the OC-With-DR scenario is that power demand rates are
considered in this scenario and that power peaks can be absorbed
through the use of an ESS (peak-shaving), resulting in lower peakload-related costs for each community participant. This is illus-
trated in Fig. 9 , where the optimized electricity purchase of the ﬁrst
10 days is shown. Fig. 9 shows that the Grid-Purchase is cut off by
the REC-Purchase and thus ﬂattened.
In this study, the annualized investment and maintenance costs
are allocated to the community participants weighted by the
amount of electricity purchased from the REC per node. This means
that if a participant purchases more electricity relative to the total
REC-Purchase, its investment and maintenance costs share in the
Fig. 8. The annual electricity demand of each REC participant satis ﬁed by the calcu-
lated Grid-Purchase, PV-Onsite usage and the REC-Purchase together with the cost
savings for the optimization scenario OC-Without-DR-PV. The dashed bars show how
much renewable PV electricity was exported to other community participants.
Table 9The results of the green ﬁeld reference (RC-Without-DR and RC-With-DR) and investment scenarios (OC-Without-DR and OC-With-DR) calculated through a cost minimization.
Scenario PV
[kW]ESS
[kWh]REC-Purchase
[kWh/a]Community Energy Costs
[V/a]Cost Savings
[%]Community CO
2Emissions
[kg-CO 2/a]CO2Savings
[%]
RC-Without-DR ee e 13,778.50 e 15,281.18 e
RC-With-DR ee e 13,554.91 e 15,281.18 e
OC-Without-DR 46.37 e 20,129.30 11,831.10 14.13 10,899.84 28.67
OC-With-DR 52.22 14.15 23,929.76 11,481.03 15.30 10,076.12 34.06
Fig. 9. The calculated electricity purchase from the grid and the REC of Node 2
determined via the optimization scenario OC-With-DR.A. Cosic, M. Stadler, M. Mansoor et al. Energy 237 (2021) 121559
11

===PAGE 12===
technologies will also be correspondingly higher. The optimization
results of each node together with the objective function savings
obtained from the investment scenarios OC-Without-DR and OC-
With-DR are shown in Fig. 10 and Fig. 11 respectively.
The calculated results show that with the invested technologies,
the total annual community energy costs can be reduced by 14.13%
and the total annual CO 2emissions can be reduced by 28.67%
within the REC in the OC-Without-DR investment scenario. More-
over, the results show that each participant in a REC constellation
can bene ﬁt with a signi ﬁcant cost reduction of at least approx. 6% to
a maximum of over 18%. In the OC-With-DR scenario with demand
tariffs, the optimization results show an even higher total annual
energy cost reduction of 15.3% and total annual CO 2reduction of
34.06% within the community. This is due to the larger capacity of
the invested PV technology and the additional ESS where the PV
electricity can be stored, allowing more renewable electricity to be
shared within the REC. This ESS allows to reduce the peak load-
related costs in a targeted manner through the additional, time-
limited renewable power supply of the community participants
from the ESS (peak-shaving) when demand rates are used.Furthermore, this additionally increases the total renewable energy
share in the overall electricity supply of the REC, resulting in even
lower CO 2emissions when investing in a ESS. Thus, the results
show that renewable energy communities can signi ﬁcantly reduce
both energy costs and CO 2emissions with the presented MILP-
based planning approach, especially when demand-based tariffs
are used for the utility purchase.
5. Conclusion
This research work addresses the decarbonization of the
regional sector via targeted, MILP-based optimal planning of
renewable energy communities in a microgrid constellation. It ex-
amines and analyzes a real case study, where an energy community
testbed was created by a leading Austrian energy service provider
in a village in Carinthia, Austria. The study considers the develop-
ment of a MILP-based optimization framework, where distributed
PV generation systems, energy storage systems, different electricity
tariff scenarios and market signals are taken into account, so that a
real REC setup can be mapped mathematically accurately and
optimally planned. The case study considers in total three differentreference cases and three corresponding optimization and invest-
ment scenarios in a REC setup, where the renewable energy
transfer between nine community participants is enabled.
Theﬁrst reference case RC-Without-DR-PV represents the cur-
rent status of the participants and considers the three existing PV
systems where the PV surplus can only be fed into the grid. The
associated optimization case OC-Without-DR-PV determines by
how much the total PV self-consumption of the REC can be
increased and thus how much total annual energy costs and total
annual CO
2emissions can be saved with the prevailing tariff sce-
nario when the renewable energy transfer between the partici-
pants is enabled. The second and third reference cases RC-Without-
DR and RC-With-DR are green ﬁeld scenarios with different tariff
schemes in each case (one without and one with demand rates),
where no existing PV technologies are considered. The corre-
sponding investment and optimization cases OC-Without-DR and
OC-With-DR determine how much is invested in new PV and ESS
technologies, and thus how much energy costs and CO 2emissions
can be saved with the optimally chosen technology capacities. For
all cases, the total annual energy costs and the total annual CO 2
emissions are calculated through a cost minimization of the opti-mization model.
In summary, the optimization results of the ﬁrst OC-Without-
DR-PV case show that the total PV own use of the REC can be
increased from 26.5% to 65.2% only by enabling the renewable
energy transfer between the participants. Through the additional
possibility to purchase renewable electricity from the REC at a
lower tariff, the total annual energy costs can be reduced by 8.73%
and the total annual CO
2emissions can be reduced by 14.7% within
the REC at the same time. For the green ﬁeld optimization scenario
OC-Without-DR, the cost minimization only invests in central PV
technologies, resulting in the total annual energy cost savings of
14.13% and the total annual CO 2savings of 28.67%. However, the
greatest savings are achieved in the green ﬁeld optimization sce-
nario OC-With-DR with demand rates. In this case, investments are
also made in central ESS technologies, which are primarily used for
peak shaving and thus further reducing the peak load-related costs
for each community participant. Here the optimization results
show a total annual energy cost reduction of 15.3% and a total
annual CO 2reduction of 34.06% within the community.
Overall, the key results of this work indicate that REC can
signiﬁcantly reduce the total annual energy costs and CO 2emis-
sions through an optimal selection and operation of the distributed
energy technologies if the renewable energy is transferred and
Fig. 10. The annual electricity demand of each REC participant satis ﬁed by the
calculated Grid-Purchase and the REC-Purchase together with the cost savings for the
optimization scenario OC-Without-DR.
Fig. 11. The annual electricity demand of each REC participant satis ﬁed by the calcu-
lated Grid-Purchase and the REC-Purchase together with the cost savings for theoptimization scenario OC-With-DR.A. Cosic, M. Stadler, M. Mansoor et al. Energy 237 (2021) 121559
12

===PAGE 13===
shared between the community participants. Moreover, all opti-
mization scenarios performed via the presented MILP-based plan-
ning approach show that each community participant can bene ﬁt
both economically and ecologically with the optimal sizing and
full-year operational dispatch of the corresponding technologies,
regardless of the electricity tariff scenario selected. However, the
greatest cost bene ﬁt can be achieved if investments in additional
technologies or energy storage systems are enabled. This allows to
reduce the peak load-related costs in a targeted manner through
the additional, time-limited renewable power supply of the com-
munity participants from the ESS (peak-shaving) when demand
rates are used.
The future research work will include the extension of this study
and consider the game theoretic concepts to distribute the total
cumulative cost savings and CO 2savings among different com-
munity participants individually based on their cooperative
participation. This will also help energy system planners to
consider various energy sharing strategies in the ﬁeld of coopera-
tive optimization.
Credit author statement
Armin Cosic: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Data
curation, Visualization, Writing ereview &editing. Michael Sta-
dler: Conceptualization, Methodology, Supervision, Resources,
Writing ereview &editing. Muhammad Mansoor: Conceptuali-
zation, Methodology, Data curation, Writing ereview &editing.Michael Zellinger: Resources, Visualization, Project
administration.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing
ﬁnancial interests or personal relationships that could have
appeared to in ﬂuence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to acknowledge Esther Fellinger from
KELAG, a leading energy service provider in Austria, and Georg
Wurzer from KNG-K €arnten Netz GmbH, the main electricity grid
operator in Carinthia, for the valuable discussions on this topic and
partially funding this project. Major funding was provided by the
Austrian Research and Promotion Agency (FFG) under the project
OptEnGrid (grant no. 858815), the province of Lower Austria under
the project Grundlagenforschung Smart und Microgrids (grant no.
K3-F-755/001-2017) and the COMET program 2019 e2023 of BEST -
Bioenergy and Sustainable Technologies GmbH under the projects
C-52-076-0-OptInvest ,C-52-080-0-OptControl and C-52-077-0-
SEBA/KELAG .
Appendix A. Node-speci ﬁc results
Table A1
RC-Without-DR-PV results of each node.
Node Grid-Purchase
[kWh/a]PV-Production
[kWh/a]PV-Onsite
[kWh/a]Total Energy Costs
[V/a]Total CO 2Emissions
[kg-CO 2/a]
1 19,972.69 0 0 3,618.40 4,707.04
2 2,651.8 18,115.65 2,519.75 (13.9%) 1,002.63 656.19
3 378.09 0 0 246.24 88.514 1,395.14 0 0 451.38 326.115 1,816.81 0 0 476.21 437.946 10,736.24 4,303.49 3,357.59 (78%) 2,516.58 2,729.557 9,452.83 0 0 2,076.61 2,300.868 1,032.78 2,664.07 770.85 (28.9%) 438.09 256.319 9,817.13 0 0 2,150.10 2,376.74
Total 57,253.51 25,083.21 6,648.19 (26.5%) 12,976.25 13,879.25
Table A2
OC-Without-DR results of each node.
Node Grid-Purchase
[kWh/a]REC-Purchase
[kWh/a]PV-REC-Export
[kWh/a]Total Energy Costs
[V/a]Cost Savings
[%]Total CO 2Emissions
[kg-CO 2/a]CO2Savings
[%]
1 18,085.91 1,886.77 0 3,438.59 4.97 4,351.51 7.55
2 2,651.66 0.14 7,528.05 1,002.61 0 656.16 0
3 280.49 97.61 0 2,234.29 4.85 69.46 21.524 1,035.99 359.15 0 407.42 9.74 257.77 20.965 1,362.07 454.74 0 423.51 11.07 338.53 22.706 9,232.4 1,503.84 632.24 2,332.51 7.31 2,362.8 13.447 6,985.86 2,466.96 0 1,774.66 14.54 1,785.57 22.408 986.87 45.91 1,534.42 432.48 1.28 244.64 4.559 6,937.54 2,879.59 0 1,797.63 16.39 1,773.01 25.40
Total 47,558.79 9,694.71 9,694.71 11,843.70 8.73 11,839.45 14.70A. Cosic, M. Stadler, M. Mansoor et al. Energy 237 (2021) 121559
13

===PAGE 14===
Table A3
RC-Without-DR and RC-With-DR results of each node.
Node Grid-Purchase
[kWh/a]Total CO 2Emissions
[kg-CO 2/a]Without-DR With-DR
Total Energy Costs
[V/a]Total Energy Costs
[V/a]
1 19,972.69 4,707.04 3,618.40 3,639.43
2 5,171.55 1,205.9 1,213.08 1,172.613 378.10 88.51 246.24 220.234 1,395.14 326.11 451.38 426.285 1,816.81 437.94 476.21 470.096 14,093.83 3,416.54 3,012.70 2,973.577 9,452.83 2,300.86 2,076.61 2,031.588 1,803.63 421.54 533.77 516.00
9 9,817.13 2,376.74 2,150.10 2,105.11
Total 63,901.69 15,281.18 13,778.50 13,554.91
Table A4
OC-Without-DR results of each node.
Node Grid-Purchase
[kWh/a]REC-Purchase
[kWh/a]Total Energy Costs
[V/a]Cost Savings
[%]Total CO 2Emissions
[kg-CO 2/a]CO2Savings
[%]
1 17,038.1 2,934.58 3,401.74 5.99 4,109.12 12.70
2 2,953.54 2,218.01 989.22 18.45 733.25 39.19
3 222.59 155.50 230.55 6.37 55.42 37.394 816.95 578.20 393.02 12.93 203.41 37.635 1,087.75 729.06 407.37 14.46 261.69 40.256 8,614.12 5,479.71 2,459.63 18.36 2,203.69 35.507 5,897.95 3,554.88 1,717.82 17.28 1,512.07 34.288 1,050.26 753.37 457.73 14.25 261.25 38.029 6,091.13 3,726.00 1,774.03 17.49 1,559.94 34.37
Total 43,772.39 20,129.30 11,831.10 14.13 10,899.84 28.67
Table A5
OC-With-DR results of each node.
Node Grid-Purchase
[kWh/a]REC-Purchase
[kWh/a]Total Energy Costs
[V/a]Cost Savings
[%]Total CO 2Emissions
[kg-CO 2/a]CO2Savings
[%]
1 16,939.24 3,033.44 3,403.20 6.49 4,090.04 13.11
2 2,374.73 2,796.82 934.93 20.27 606.58 49.70
3 128.04 250.05 180.60 18.00 31.77 64.114 598.89 796.26 340.76 20.06 151.78 53.465 425.97 1,390.84 328.56 30.11 101.61 76.806 8,211.39 5,882.44 2,475.52 16.75 2,145.4 37.217 5,217.33 4,235.49 1,680.29 17.29 1,366.73 40.608 859.62 944.01 415.86 19.41 219.35 47.969 5,216.71 4,600.42 1,721.31 18.23 1,362.86 42.66
Total 39,971.92 23,929.76 11,481.03 15.30 10,076.12 34.06A. Cosic, M. Stadler, M. Mansoor et al. Energy 237 (2021) 121559
14

===PAGE 15===
References
[1]IRENA. Renewable energy and climate Pledges: Five Years after the Paris
Agreement. Abu Dhabi: International Renewable Energy Agency; 2019 .
[2] Wang R, Hsu SC, Zheng S, Chen JH, Li XI. Renewable energy microgrids:
economic evaluation and decision making for government policies to
contribute to affordable and clean energy. Appl Energy 2020;274:115287.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2020.115287 .
[3] Tabar VS, Jirdehi MA, Hemmati R. Sustainable planning of hybrid microgrid
towards minimizing environmental pollution, operational cost and frequencyﬂuctuations. J Clean Prod 2018;203:1187 e200. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.jclepro.2018.05.059 .
[4]Basu AK, Chowdhury SP, Chowdhury S, Paul S. Microgrids: energy manage-
ment by strategic deployment of DERs da comprehensive survey. Renew
Sustain Energy Rev 2011;15(9):4348 e56.
[5] Schwaegerl C, Tao L. Quanti ﬁcation of technical, economic, environmental and
social bene ﬁts of microgrid operation. In: Microgrids. John Wiley and Sons
Ltd; 2013. p. 275 e313. https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118720677.ch07 .
[6]Long C, Wu J, Zhang C, Thomas L, Cheng M, Jenkins N. Peer-to-peer energy
trading in a community microgrid. In: 2017 IEEE power energy society general
meeting. IEEE; 2017, July. p. 1 e5.
[7] Directorate-General for Energy (European Commission). Clean energy for all
Europeans. Euroheat Power 2019;14(2):3. https://doi.org/10.2833/9937 .
[8] European Parliament. Directive (EU) 2018/2001 of the European Parliament
and of the Council on the promotion of the use of energy from renewable
sources. Off J Eur Union 2018;2018(L 328):82 e209. https://eur-lex.europa.eu/
legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri ¼CELEX:32018L2001from ¼EN.
[9] European Parliament. Directive (EU) 2019/944 on Common rules for the in-
ternal market for electricity. Off J Eur Union 2019;L 158:18. http://www.omel.
es/en/ ﬁles/directive_celex_32019l0944_en.pdf .
[10] In^es C, Guilherme PL, Esther MG, Swantje G, Stephen H, Lars H. Regulatory
challenges and opportunities for collective renewable energy prosumers in
the EU. Energy Pol 2020;138:111212 .
[11] 58/ME (XXVII. GP) - Erneuerbaren-Ausbau-Gesetz eEAG. Erneuerbaren-
ausbau-gesetzespaket eEAG-Paket. 2012. https://www.parlament.gv.at/
PAKT/VHG/XXVII/ME/ME_00058/index.shtml .
[12] Park C, Yong T. Comparative review and discussion on P2P electricity trading.
Energy Procedia 2017;128:3 e9.
[13] Zhang C, Wu J, Long C, Cheng M. Review of existing peer-to-peer energytrading projects. Energy Procedia 2017;105:2563 e8.
[14] Mengelkamp E, G €arttner J, Rock K, Kessler S, Orsini L, Weinhardt C. Designing
microgrid energy markets: a case study: the Brooklyn Microgrid. Appl Energy
2018;210:870
e80.
[15] Leong CH, Gu C, Li F. Auction mechanism for P2P local energy trading
considering physical constraints. Energy Procedia 2019;158:6613 e8.
[16] Morstyn T, Teytelboym A, McCulloch MD. Bilateral contract networks for
peer-to-peer energy trading. IEEE Trans Smart Grid 2018;10(2):2026 e35.
[17] Long C, Wu J, Zhou Y, Jenkins N. Aggregated battery control for peer-to-peer
energy sharing in a community Microgrid with PV battery systems. Energy
Procedia 2018;145:522 e7.
[18] Reihani E, Siano P, Genova M. A new method for peer-to-peer energy ex-
change in distribution grids. Energies 2020;13(4):799. https://doi.org/
10.3390/en13040799 .
[19] Cui S, Wang YW, Shi Y, Xiao JW. An ef ﬁcient peer-to-peer energy-sharing
framework for numerous community prosumers. IEEE Trans Ind Inf
2020;16(12):7402 e12.https://doi.org/10.1109/TII.2019.2960802 .
[20] Lin CC, Wu YF, Liu WY. Optimal sharing energy of a complex of houses
through energy trading in the Internet of energy. Energy 2021;220:119613 .
[21] Mahmoud MS, Rahman MSU, Fouad MS. Review of microgrid architectures ea
system of systems perspective. IET Renew Power Gener 2015;9(8):1064 e78.
[22] Huang H, Nie S, Lin J, Wang Y, Dong J. Optimization of peer-to-peer power
trading in a microgrid with distributed PV and battery energy storage sys-tems. Sustainability 2020;12(3). https://doi.org/10.3390/su12030923 .
[23] Fleischhacker A, Lettner G, Schwabeneder D, Auer H. Portfolio optimization of
energy communities to meet reductions in costs and emissions. Energy
2019;173:1092 e105. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2019.02.104 .
[24] Mansoor M, Stadler M, Zellinger M, Lichtenegger K, Auer H, Cosic A. Optimal
planning of thermal energy systems in a microgrid with seasonal storage and
Piecewise af ﬁne cost functions. Energy 2020:119095 .
[25] Stadler M, Pecenak Z, Mathiesen P, Fahy K, Kleissl J. Performance comparison
between two established microgrid planning MILP methodologies tested on
13 microgrid projects. Energies 2020;13(17):4460 .
[26] Mansoor M, Stadler M, Auer H, Zellinger M. Advanced optimal planning for
microgrid technologies including hydrogen and mobility at a real microgridtestbed. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2021;46(37):19285 e302.
[27] Zwickl-Bernhard S, Auer H. Open-source modeling of a low-carbon urban
neighborhood with high shares of local renewable generation. Appl Energy
2020;282:116166 .
[28] Fina B, Fleischhacker A, Auer H, Lettner G. Economic assessment and business
models of rooftop photovoltaic systems in multiapartment buildings: case
studies for Austria and Germany. J Renew Energy 2018;2018 .
[29] Roberts MB, Bruce A, MacGill I. Impact of shared battery energy storage sys-
tems on photovoltaic self-consumption and electricity bills in apartment
buildings. Appl Energy 2019;245:78 e95.
[30] Fleischhacker A, Auer H, Lettner G, Botterud A. Sharing solar PV and energy
storage in apartment buildings: resource allocation and pricing. IEEE TransSmart Grid 2018;10(4):3963 e73.
[31]
Perger T, Wachter L, Fleischhacker A, Auer H. PV sharing in local communities:
peer-to-peer trading under consideration of the prosumers' willingness-to-
pay. Sustain Cities Soc 2021;66:102634 .
[32] Jiang A, Yuan H, Li D. A two-stage optimization approach on the decisions for
prosumers and consumers within a community in the Peer-to-peer energy
sharing trading. Int J Electr Power Energy Syst 2021;125:106527 .
[33] Mashayekh S, Stadler M, Cardoso G, Heleno M. A mixed integer linear pro-
gramming approach for optimal DER portfolio, sizing, and placement in multi-
energy microgrids. Appl Energy 2017;187:154 e68.
[34] Fahy K, Stadler M, Pecenak ZK, Kleissl J. Input data reduction for microgrid
sizing and energy cost modeling: representative days and demand charges.J Renew Sustain Energy 2019;11(6):065301 .
[35] Remund J, Müller S, Kunz S, Schilter C. METEONORM: Global meteorological
database for solar energy and applied climatology. Meteotest; 2007 .
[36] Oib-Rl 6. Energieeinsparung und W €armeschutz, OIB-Leitfaden Ener-
gietechnisches Verhalten von Geb €auden, OIB-330.6-027/19. 2019. Retrieved
November 20, 2020, from, https://www.oib.or.at/sites/default/ ﬁles/
erlaeuternde_bemerkungen_richtlinie_6_12.04.19_0.pdf .
[37] IRENA. Global energy Transformation: a Roadmap to 2050. Abu Dhabi: IRENA;
2018 .
[38] IRENA. Electricity storage and renewables: costs and markets to 2030. Abu
Dhabi: International Renewable Energy Agency; 2017 .
[39] Tesla. Tesla Powerwall 2. 2020. Retrieved November 20, 2020, from, https://
www.tesla.com/sites/default/ ﬁles/pdfs/powerwall/Powerwall%202_AC_
Datasheet_de_DE.pdf .
[40] Battery University. How to prolong Lithium-based batteries. 2020. Retrieved
November 20, 2020, from, https://batteryuniversity.com/learn/article/how_
to_prolong_lithium_based_batteries .
Fig. A1. The total electricity transfer from Node 2 to all other nodes for the optimi-
zation scenario OC-Without-DR-PV.A. Cosic, M. Stadler, M. Mansoor et al. Energy 237 (2021) 121559
15

===PAGE 16===
[41] Battery University. Elevating self-discharge. 2018. Retrieved November 20,
2020, from, https://batteryuniversity.com/learn/article/elevating_self_
discharge .
[42] E-Control. Decreed grid usage rates for 2020. 2020. Retrieved November 20,
2020, from, https://www.e-control.at/industrie/strom/strompreis/
netzentgelte .
[43] E-Control. Taxes and charges. 2020. Retrieved November 20, 2020, from,
https://www.e-control.at/marktteilnehmer/strom/strommarkt/preise/
steuern-und-abgaben .
[44] RIS. Ordinance of E-Control ’s Regulatory Commission determining the fees forgrid use. 2020. Retrieved November 20, 2020, from, https://www.ris.bka.gv.
at/GeltendeFassung.wxe?
Abfrage ¼Bundesnormen &Gesetzesnummer ¼20010107 .
[45] KELAG. Kelag Home basic energy rate. 2020. Retrieved November 20, 2020,
from, https://www.kelag.at/ ﬁles/folder/Produktfolder/Privatkunden/Strom/
Tarifblatt_Kelag_Home_Basic.pdf .
[46] EPEX Spot. EPEX spot market auction prices for 2019 - Austria. 2019.
Retrieved November 20, 2020, from, https://www.epexspot.com/en/market-
data .A. Cosic, M. Stadler, M. Mansoor et al. Energy 237 (2021) 121559
16